Add ZooKeeper to KRaft migration blog post (#420)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration.md

After the update, the brokers need to be rolled one by one to make such configuration changes effective.
On restart, the brokers register to the KRaft controller quorum and the migration begins.
The KRaft controller leader copies all metadata from ZooKeeper to the `__cluster_metadata` topic.

![KRaft migration running](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-03-kraft-migration.png)

While the migration is running, you can verify its status by looking at the log on the KRaft controller leader or by checking the `kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkMigrationState` metric.
When the migration is completed, that is the metric value is `MIGRATION`, the brokers are anyway still running in ZooKeeper mode.
The KRaft controllers are in charge of handling any requests related to metadata changes within the cluster but they keep sending RPCs to the brokers for metadata updates.
The metadata are still copied to ZooKeeper and the cluster is working in a so called "dual-write" mode.

![KRaft dual-write](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-04-kraft-dual-write.png)

> #### Moving brokers to be full KRaft

Reviewer: This subheading is a bit weird. What about "Finalizing the broker migration" or "Restarting the brokers in KRaft mode"?

If you update this, also update the first sentence below to match

The next step is about moving the brokers to be in full KRaft mode and not using ZooKeeper anymore.
In order to do so, the brokers configuration is updated by removing the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
All the brokers are rolled again and, on restart, they are now in full KRaft mode without any connection or usage of ZooKeeper.
The KRaft controllers are still in "dual-write" mode and any metadata changes are copied to ZooKeeper.

![Brokers only full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-05-brokers-kraft.png)

> 

Reviewer: Maybe mention this is the last step when users can still rollback?

#### Migration finalization

The final step is to reconfigure the KRaft controllers without the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
When all the KRaft controllers are rolled, the cluster is working in full KRaft mode and the ZooKeeper ensemble is not used anymore.

> From now on, it is possible to deprovision the ZooKeeper nodes from your environment.

Reviewer: Rather than `it is possible`, shouldn't it be `you should`? because at this point ZooKeeper is unused and just using resources/costing money.

---
layout: post

> title:  "From ZooKeeper to KRaft: how the Kafka migration works"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title:  "From ZooKeeper to KRaft: How the Kafka migration works"
```

date: 2024-03-20
author: paolo_patierno
---

The Apache Kafka project has been using [Apache ZooKeeper](https://zookeeper.apache.org/) since its inception to store metadata.
Registered brokers, the current controller and topics' configuration are just a few of the data that ZooKeeper stores for supporting a running Kafka cluster.
Using a dedicated and centralized system for maintaining cluster metadata and offload leader election was the right approach at that time, because ZooKeeper was battle tested and it is purpose built for providing distributed coordination.
But taking care of an additional component alongside your Kafka cluster is not that simple.
Furthermore, ZooKeeper has become a bottleneck that limits the amount of partitions that a single broker can handle.

> For these and other reasons, the Kafka community opened the "famous" [KIP-500](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-500%3A+Replace+ZooKeeper+with+a+Self-Managed+Metadata+Quorum) in late 2019 and started to work on the ZooKeeper removal.

Reviewer 3: From a reader's POV, I'd think this article is talking about the "how the migration works" from the article title, but from the first paragraph it looks like we didn't mention anything about the migration. Should we at least say something about it here?

<!--more-->

### What is "wrong" with ZooKeeper?

> As already mentioned, Kafka has been using ZooKeeper as its metadata management system for several functions:

Reviewer 2: This seems weird. I don't think I would call all of these metadata management. But even if you do, the word _functions_ seems weird as it suggests some unique functionality for each point. Maybe something like `tasks` would be better?

Author: I will change to "tasks". Anyway, my idea was to list just some of them I considered the well-known ones to most of the people. I will make it clearer the list is covering just some of them.

* **Cluster membership**: each broker, joining the Kafka cluster, registers itself with a ephemeral znode on ZooKeeper;
* **Controller election**: when a broker starts, it tries to take the "controller" role by creating the ephemeral `/controller` znode on ZooKeeper. If that znode already exists, it indicates which broker is the current controller;
* **Topics configuration**: all the topics' configuration parameters are stored in ZooKeeper together with information like the number of partitions and the current broker assignments for the replicas;
* **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: when a client connects to the cluster, it could be authenticated and authorized to read or write on several topics based on the ACLs stored in ZooKeeper by the built-in Authorizer;
* **Quotas**: brokers can limit resources used by clients in terms of network bandwidth and CPU utilization via quotas stored in ZooKeeper by the built-in Quotas provider;

By using the `zookeeper-shell` tool, it is possible to connect to a ZooKeeper ensemble and see all the znodes.

```shell

> bin/zookeeper-shell.sh <zookeeper-ip-address>:2181

Reviewer 2: There seems to be missing context how/where to use it which I guess suggests this works with Strimzi. But obviously, in Strimzi you cannot do this. I wonder if you should use `kubectl exec` and port `12181` for this so that users can try it?

Author: That's not on Strimzi. This is about migration in general so there is no assumption you are running on Strimzi. It could be any bare-metal or vms environment so you run it from where you can reach a ZooKeeper node assuming port 2181 is open. Tbh I didn't have the command at the beginning to not be so specific and added it after a suggestion by @mimaison.

Author: No there are no Strimzi examples anymore :-)
I split the article, so the Strimzi part is now a new PR https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi.github.io/pull/424 for the next blog post. This one is really generic around ZooKeeper to KRaft migration wherever you are running the system.

Author: If you are referring to the usage of `/var/lib/kafka/data-0/kafka-log0` for the log dirs, yes it's coming from Strimzi which was how I was running the cluster. But I am specifying that the path represents the log dirs. I could also change it in something different like just `/tmp/kafka-log` or other. But then, I don't think there are other references to Strimzi.

Reviewer 2: The example right below that is clearly Strimzi. So you should use another one if you want to make it Stirmzi-independent. You should also make it clear in the text then that it is what you would see any some random KAfka cluster and not something you can do in Strimzi.

Author: Right! The endpoints! I don't want to make stuff much more complicated, I will mention I was using a Strimzi-operated cluster to get the examples and using the right commands.

Reviewer 2: It is on a Strimzi blog. So I think if the command works on Strimzi out of the box, you do not need to explain much more 🤷

Author: I fixed the commands to run and the output adding some context about running them in a Strimzi-operated cluster.

```

As mentioned, the controller election happens when the first broker creates the ephemeral `/controller` node storing the broker ID.

```shell
get /controller
{"version":2,"brokerid":0,"timestamp":"1710691902625","kraftControllerEpoch":-1}
```

Finally, the `/config/topics` znode lists all the topics in the cluster with the corresponding configuration.

```shell
get /config/topics/my-topic
{"version":1,"config":{"retention.ms":"100000"}} // all the other configuration parameters are omitted because using default values
```

ZooKeeper data is replicated across a number of nodes which form an ensemble.

> ZooKeeper uses the ZooKeeper Atomic Broadcast (ZAB) protocol to replicate data to all nodes in the ZooKeeper ensemble.`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ZooKeeper uses the ZooKeeper Atomic Broadcast (ZAB) protocol to replicate data to all nodes in the ZooKeeper ensemble.
```

This protocol keeps all nodes in sync and ensures reliability on messages delivery.

But having ZooKeeper means operating a totally different distributed system which needs to be deployed, managed and troubleshooted.
ZooKeeper also represents a bottleneck for scalability and puts a limit on the number of topics and the corresponding partitions supported within a Kafka cluster.
It has a performance impact when, for example, there is a controller failover and the new elected one has to fetch metadata from ZooKeeper, including all the topics information.
Also, any metadata update needs to be propagated to the other brokers.

> The problem is that the metadata changes propagations, by using RPCs, grow with the number of partitions involved and more partitions means more metadata to propagate, so it takes longer and the system gets slower.

Author: > Is by using RPCs necessary?

I would leave "by using RPCs" to make it clear the mechanism as a push based (compared to KRaft which is kind of pull based).

> Maybe we can remove one?

Agree. I removed one.

| offset: 3007 CreateTime: 1710774451597 keySize: -1 valueSize: 113 sequence: -1 headerKeys: [] payload: {"type":"PARTITION_RECORD","version":1,"data":{"partitionId":1,"topicId":"xOxBrcYuSRWgtFuZIBiXIA","replicas":[3,4,5],"isr":[3,4,5],"removingReplicas":[],"addingReplicas":[],"leader":3,"leaderEpoch":0,"partitionEpoch":0,"directories":["uHY7hO6-42Q7O4k0zLMmtg","p2UpbSD99eygD2ZToiSMzg","SaZDxfHKu3NMZ7OnFP7YnA"]}}
| offset: 3008 CreateTime: 1710774451597 keySize: -1 valueSize: 113 sequence: -1 headerKeys: [] payload: {"type":"PARTITION_RECORD","version":1,"data":{"partitionId":2,"topicId":"xOxBrcYuSRWgtFuZIBiXIA","replicas":[4,5,3],"isr":[4,5,3],"removingReplicas":[],"addingReplicas":[],"leader":4,"leaderEpoch":0,"partitionEpoch":0,"directories":["p2UpbSD99eygD2ZToiSMzg","SaZDxfHKu3NMZ7OnFP7YnA","uHY7hO6-42Q7O4k0zLMmtg"]}}
```

All the possible metadata changes are encoded as specific event records in the metadata log topic in Apache Kafka.

> They are all described using JSON files (which are then used to automatically build the corresponding Java classes) you can find [here](https://github.com/apache/kafka/tree/trunk/metadata/src/main/resources/common/metadata).

Author: The period is at the end of the overall sentence right after the link "here".

A `broker` node is responsible for handing requests, including reads and writes on topics, from Kafka clients.
A `controller` node takes part in the controller quorum and replicates the metadata log. At any time, one of the `controller` nodes is the quorum leader and the others are followers that can take over in case the current leader resigns if it's restarted or fails for example.

Effectively, `broker` and `controller` are two different services running on the node within the JVM.
When in "combined" mode, a node performs both roles with the corresponding responsibilities.
Using the "combined" mode allows to reduce the number of nodes within the cluster compared to a ZooKeeper configuration.
It is not recommended for critical use cases as this offers less isolation in case of failures.
This mode is useful for small use cases, for example it allows setting up a Kafka development environment by starting a single node.

### How to migrate from ZooKeeper to KRaft

Today, most of the existing Kafka clusters are ZooKeeper-based.
Users are interested in migrating to KRaft mode in order to overcome all the limitations we have talked about.

> While KRaft is production ready for a few releases already, it lacked important features (JBOD support is still in early access) so few new clusters were deployed in KRaft mode.

Author: @mimaison wdyt? You made suggestions here.

> While KRaft is production ready for a few releases already, it lacked important features (JBOD support is still in early access) so few new clusters were deployed in KRaft mode.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can leave that part out and have something like the suggestion below.

Furthermore, ZooKeeper is already considered as deprecated and, with the Kafka project expecting to remove ZooKeeper support in an upcoming 4.0 release, expected in 2024, it is now time to consider migrating clusters from ZooKeeper to KRaft.

There is a manual procedure, consisting of several phases, to run in order to migrate a cluster without any downtime.

> The following content doesn't want to be an exhaustive description of the migration procedure but more an overview of how it is supposed to work.

Reviewer 4: suggested change below

For more details, please refer to the official [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) documentation.

#### Deploying the KRaft controller quorum

At the beginning, we have the Kafka brokers running in ZooKeeper-mode and connected to the ZooKeeper ensemble used to store metadata.

![ZooKeeper-based cluster](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-01-zk-brokers.png)

> > NOTE: the green square boxed number highlights the "generation" of the nodes which are rolled several times during the process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> NOTE: The green square boxed number highlights the "generation" of the nodes which are rolled several times during the process.
```

The first step is to deploy the KRaft controller quorum which will be in charge of maintaining the metadata in KRaft mode.
In general, the number of KRaft controller nodes will be the same as the number of the ZooKeeper nodes currently running.

> It is also important to highlight that the migration process doesn't support migrating to nodes running in "combined" mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also important to highlight that the migration process doesn't support migrating to nodes running in "combined" mode.
```

When the KRaft controllers start, they form a quorum, elect the leader and move in a state where they are waiting for the brokers to register.

![KRaft controller quorum deployed](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-02-kraft-deployed.png)

#### Enabling brokers to run the migration

The next step is to move the brokers to migration mode.
In order to do so, the brokers' configuration needs to be updated by adding connection details for all nodes of the KRaft controller quorum and enabling the migration with the `zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true` flag.
After the update, the brokers need to be rolled one by one to make such configuration changes effective.
On restart, the brokers register to the KRaft controller quorum and the migration begins.
The KRaft controller leader copies all metadata from ZooKeeper to the `__cluster_metadata` topic.

![KRaft migration running](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-03-kraft-migration.png)

While the migration is running, you can verify its status by looking at the log on the KRaft controller leader or by checking the `kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkMigrationState` metric.

> When the migration is completed, that is the metric value is `MIGRATION`, the brokers are still running in ZooKeeper mode.

Reviewer 3: When the migration is completed, that is the metric value [becomes] `MIGRATION`, ...

> The KRaft controllers are in charge of handling any requests related to metadata changes within the cluster but they keep sending RPCs to the brokers for metadata updates.

Reviewer 3: I'm not complete sure if it will keeps sending RPCs to the brokers for metadata updates at this stage. I think the broker "should" read metadata update from metadata log from KRaft controller, but maybe I'm wrong. Are you sure you're right? Should I start up a cluster to verify it?

Author: This is how it works IIRC. Also watching the Kafka Summit presentation about migration was like this. Of course, if you could test to confirm it would be great :-)

Reviewer 3: OK, let me try that later.

Reviewer 3: OK, confirmed you're right. In dual-write mode, the KRaft controller still sends the LeaderAndISR, updateMetadata RPC to brokers.

Here's the log snippet from the KRaft controller while the broker is in the `MIGRATION` state.

```
[2024-03-21 18:06:59,466] INFO [QuorumController id=1] CreateTopics result(s): CreatableTopic(name='quickstart-events2', numPartitions=-1, replicationFactor=-1, assignments=[], configs=[]): SUCCESS (org.apache.kafka.controller.ReplicationControlManager)
[2024-03-21 18:06:59,466] INFO [QuorumController id=1] Replayed TopicRecord for topic quickstart-events2 with topic ID btjye7G1Q9OsSh6xd-xXgQ. (org.apache.kafka.controller.ReplicationControlManager)
[2024-03-21 18:06:59,466] INFO [QuorumController id=1] Replayed PartitionRecord for new partition quickstart-events2-0 with topic ID btjye7G1Q9OsSh6xd-xXgQ and PartitionRegistration(replicas=[0], directories=[gYNd_gPZql98DYeZ-5NAQw], isr=[0], removingReplicas=[], addingReplicas=[], elr=[], lastKnownElr=[], leader=0, leaderRecoveryState=RECOVERED, leaderEpoch=0, partitionEpoch=0). (org.apache.kafka.controller.ReplicationControlManager)
...
[2024-03-21 18:06:59,518] INFO [Controller id=1 epoch=3] Sending UpdateMetadata request to brokers HashSet() for 0 partitions (state.change.logger)
[2024-03-21 18:06:59,518] INFO [Controller id=1 epoch=3] Sending LeaderAndIsr request to broker 0 with 1 become-leader and 0 become-follower partitions (state.change.logger)
[2024-03-21 18:06:59,518] INFO [Controller id=1 epoch=3] Sending UpdateMetadata request to brokers HashSet(0) for 1 partitions (state.change.logger)
```

Reviewer 5: Yeah, the active KRaft controller first sends full RPCs and then switch to incremental mode, until migration is finalized.

Author: Thanks for confirmation @showuon ;-)

#### Restarting the brokers in KRaft mode

The next step is to restart the brokers in KRaft mode and not using ZooKeeper anymore.
In order to do so, the brokers configuration is updated by removing the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
All the brokers are rolled again and, on restart, they are now in full KRaft mode without any connection or usage of ZooKeeper.
The KRaft controllers are still in "dual-write" mode and any metadata changes are copied to ZooKeeper.
It is important to highlight this is the last chance to rollback and keep using ZooKeeper to store metadata.

![Brokers only full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-05-brokers-kraft.png)

#### Migration finalization

The final step is to reconfigure the KRaft controllers without the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
When all the KRaft controllers are rolled, the cluster is working in full KRaft mode and the ZooKeeper ensemble is not used anymore.
From now on, you should deprovision the ZooKeeper nodes from your environment.

![Cluster full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-06-kraft-cluster.png)

#### Rollback support

> During the migration process is also possible to execute a rollback procedure to revert the cluster to use the ZooKeeper ensemble again.

Reviewer 3: During the migration process[, it] is also possible...

The rollback is allowed until the KRaft controllers are still connected to ZooKeeper because they are working in "dual-write" mode by effectively copying metadata to ZooKeeper.
When the migration is finalized and the KRaft controllers are not connected to ZooKeeper, the rollback is not possible anymore.

### Conclusion

> The Apache Kafka community has deprecated the usage of ZooKeeper to store the cluster metadata and it will be totally removed in the 4.0 version coming later this year or early the next one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Apache Kafka community has deprecated the usage of ZooKeeper to store the cluster metadata and it will be completely removed in the 4.0 version coming later this year or early the next one.
```

By using the new `process.roles` configuration parameter, a Kafka node can act as a `broker`, a `controller` or perform both roles in "combined" mode
A `broker` node is responsible for handing requests, including reads and writes on topics, from Kafka clients.
A `controller` node takes part in the controller quorum and replicates the metadata log. At any time, one of the `controller` nodes is the quorum leader and the others are followers that can take over in case the current leader resigns if it's restarted or fails for example.

Effectively, `broker` and `controller` are two different services running on the node within the JVM.
When in "combined" mode, a node performs both roles with the corresponding responsibilities.
Using the "combined" mode allows to reduce the number of nodes within the cluster compared to a ZooKeeper configuration.
It is not recommended for critical use cases as this offers less isolation in case of failures.
This mode is useful for small use cases, for example it allows setting up a Kafka development environment by starting a single node.

### How to migrate from ZooKeeper to KRaft

> Today, most of the existing Kafka clusters are ZooKeeper-based.
> Users are interested in migrating to KRaft mode in order to overcome all the limitations we have talked about.
> While KRaft is production ready for a few releases already, it lacked important features (JBOD support is still in early access) so few new clusters were deployed in KRaft mode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While KRaft has been production ready for a few releases already, with features being added in each release, most existing Kafka clusters are still ZooKeeper-based.
However, users are interested in migrating to KRaft mode in order to overcome all the ZooKeeper limitations we have talked about.
```

Furthermore, ZooKeeper is already considered as deprecated and, with the Kafka project expecting to remove ZooKeeper support in an upcoming 4.0 release, expected in 2024, it is now time to consider migrating clusters from ZooKeeper to KRaft.

> There is a manual procedure, consisting of several phases, to run in order to migrate a cluster without any downtime.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To migrate a cluster without any downtime, there is a manual procedure to follow that consists of several phases.
```

> The following content doesn't want to be an exhaustive description of the migration procedure but more an overview of how it is supposed to work.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following content aims to provide an overview of how the migration procedure is supposed to work, rather than offering an exhaustive description.
```

For more details, please refer to the official [ZooKeeper to KRaft Migration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#kraft_zk_migration) documentation.

#### Deploying the KRaft controller quorum

> At the beginning, we have the Kafka brokers running in ZooKeeper-mode and connected to the ZooKeeper ensemble used to store metadata.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before starting the migration, we have Kafka brokers running in ZooKeeper-mode and connected to the ZooKeeper ensemble used to store metadata.
```

![ZooKeeper-based cluster](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-01-zk-brokers.png)

> > NOTE: The green square boxed number highlights the "generation" of the nodes while will be rolled several times during the process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> NOTE: The green square boxed number highlights the "generation" of the nodes that will be rolled several times during the process.
```

When the KRaft controllers start, they form a quorum, elect the leader and move in a state where they are waiting for the brokers to register.

![KRaft controller quorum deployed](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-02-kraft-deployed.png)

#### Enabling brokers to run the migration

The next step is to move the brokers to migration mode.
In order to do so, the brokers' configuration needs to be updated by adding connection details for all nodes of the KRaft controller quorum and enabling the migration with the `zookeeper.metadata.migration.enable=true` flag.
After the update, the brokers need to be rolled one by one to make such configuration changes effective.
On restart, the brokers register to the KRaft controller quorum and the migration begins.
The KRaft controller leader copies all metadata from ZooKeeper to the `__cluster_metadata` topic.

![KRaft migration running](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-03-kraft-migration.png)

While the migration is running, you can verify its status by looking at the log on the KRaft controller leader or by checking the `kafka.controller:type=KafkaController,name=ZkMigrationState` metric.

> When the migration is completed, that is the metric value becomes `MIGRATION`, the brokers are still running in ZooKeeper mode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the migration is completed, and the metric value changes to `MIGRATION`, the brokers are still running in ZooKeeper mode.
```

The KRaft controllers are in charge of handling any requests related to metadata changes within the cluster but they keep sending RPCs to the brokers for metadata updates.
Metadata updates are still copied to ZooKeeper and the cluster is working in a so called "dual-write" mode.

![KRaft dual-write](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-04-kraft-dual-write.png)

#### Restarting the brokers in KRaft mode

> The next step is to restart the brokers in KRaft mode and not using ZooKeeper anymore.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The next step is to restart the brokers in KRaft mode and not use ZooKeeper anymore.
```

In order to do so, the brokers configuration is updated by removing the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.
All the brokers are rolled again and, on restart, they are now in full KRaft mode without any connection or usage of ZooKeeper.
The KRaft controllers are still in "dual-write" mode and any metadata changes are copied to ZooKeeper.

> It is important to highlight this is the last chance to rollback and keep using ZooKeeper to store metadata.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**This is the last chance to rollback and keep using ZooKeeper to store metadata.**
```

![Brokers only full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-05-brokers-kraft.png)

#### Migration finalization

> The final step is to reconfigure the KRaft controllers without the connection to ZooKeeper and disabling the migration flag.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The final step is to reconfigure the KRaft controllers without the connection to ZooKeeper and disable the migration flag.
```

When all the KRaft controllers are rolled, the cluster is working in full KRaft mode and the ZooKeeper ensemble is not used anymore.
From now on, you should deprovision the ZooKeeper nodes from your environment.

![Cluster full KRaft](/assets/images/posts/2024-03-20-kraft-migration-06-kraft-cluster.png)

#### Rollback support

During the migration process, it is also possible to execute a rollback procedure to revert the cluster to use the ZooKeeper ensemble again.
The rollback is allowed until the KRaft controllers are still connected to ZooKeeper because they are working in "dual-write" mode by effectively copying metadata to ZooKeeper.
When the migration is finalized and the KRaft controllers are not connected to ZooKeeper, the rollback is not possible anymore.

### Conclusion

> The Apache Kafka community has deprecated the usage of ZooKeeper to store the cluster metadata and it will be completely removed in the 4.0 version coming later this year or early the next one.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Apache Kafka community has deprecated the usage of ZooKeeper to store the cluster metadata and it will be completely removed in the version 4.0 release.
```

> It means that users should move soon to create new KRaft-based clusters only.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This means that users should soon consider moving to using KRaft-based clusters.
```
